Basketball is a team sport in which two teams of five players try to score points by throwing or "shooting" a ball through the top of a basketball 
hoop while following a set of rules. Basketball is one of the world's most popular and widely viewed sports.[1]
A regulation basketball hoop consists of a rim 18 inches in diameter and 10 feet high mounted to a backboard.
 A team can score a field goal by shooting the ball through the hoop during regular play. A field goal scores two points 
 for the shooting team if a player is touching or closer to the hoop than the three-point line, and three points (a "3 pointer") if 
 the player is "outside" the three-point line. The team with more points at the end of the game wins, but additional time (overtime) 
 may be issued when the game ends with a tie. The ball can be advanced on the court by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) 
 or passing it to a teammate. It is a violation (traveling) to walk with the ball, carry it, or to double dribble 
 (to hold the ball and then resume dribbling).
Various violations are generally called "fouls". Disruptive physical contact (a personal foul) is penalized, and a free 
throw is usually awarded to an offensive player if he is fouled while shooting the ball. A technical foul may also be issued when 
certain infractions occur, most commonly for unsportsmanlike conduct on the part of a player or coach. A technical foul gives the opposing team a free throw.
Basketball has evolved many commonly used techniques of shooting, passing, and dribbling, as well as specialized player positions and offensive and defensive 
structures (player positioning) and techniques. Typically, the tallest members of a team will play "center", "small forward", or "power forward" positions, 
while shorter players or those who possess the best ball handling skills and speed play "point guard" or "shooting guard".
While competitive basketball is carefully regulated, numerous variations of basketball have developed for casual play. 
Competitive basketball is primarily an indoor sport played on carefully marked and maintained basketball courts, but less 
regulated variations are often played outdoors in both inner city and rural areas.
In early December 1891, Dr. James Naismith,[2] a physical education professor and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training 
School[3] (YMCA) (today, Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, USA, was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day. He sought a vigorous 
indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough
or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto a 10-foot (3.05 m) elevated track. In contrast with modern 
basketball nets, this peach basket retained its bottom, and balls had to be retrieved manually after each "basket" or point scored; this proved inefficient, 
however, so the bottom of the basket was removed,[4] allowing the balls to be poked out with a long dowel each time.